Getting Started
---------------

An example script, ``example.py``, exists in the ``tests/example-data``
directory. We step through it here for a quick rundown of gala's
capabilities.

First, import gala's submodules:

.. code:: python

    from gala import imio, classify, features, agglo, evaluate as ev

Next, read in the training data: a ground truth volume (``gt_train``), a
probability map (``pr_train``) and a superpixel or watershed map
(``ws_train``).

.. code:: python

    gt_train, pr_train, ws_train = (map(imio.read_h5_stack,
                                    ['train-gt.lzf.h5', 'train-p1.lzf.h5',
                                     'train-ws.lzf.h5']))

A *feature manager* is a callable object that computes feature vectors
from graph edges. The object has the following responsibilities, which
it can inherit from ``classify.base.Null``:

-  create a (possibly empty) *feature cache* on each edge and node,
   precomputing some of the calculations needed for feature computation;
-  maintain the feature cache throughout node merges during
   agglomeration; and,
-  compute the feature vector from the feature caches when called with
   the inputs of a graph and two nodes.

Feature managers can be chained through the ``features.Composite``
class.

.. code:: python

    fm = features.moments.Manager()
    fh = features.histogram.Manager()
    fc = features.base.Composite(children=[fm, fh])

With the feature manager, and the above data, we can create a *region
adjacency graph* or *RAG*, and use it to train the agglomeration
process:

.. code:: python

    g_train = agglo.Rag(ws_train, pr_train, feature_manager=fc)
    (X, y, w, merges) = g_train.learn_agglomerate(gt_train, fc)[0]
    y = y[:, 0] # gala has 3 truth labeling schemes, pick the first one

``X`` and ``y`` above have the now-standard scikit-learn `supervised
dataset
format <http://scikit-learn.org/stable/tutorial/statistical_inference/settings.html#datasets>`__.
This means we can use any classifier that satisfies the scikit-learn
API. Below, we use a simple wrapper around the scikit-learn
``RandomForestClassifier``.

.. code:: python

    rf = classify.default_random_forest().fit(X, y)

The composition of a feature map and a classifier defines a *policy* or
*merge priority function*, which will determine the agglomeration of a
volume of hereby unseen data (the *test* volume).

.. code:: python

    learned_policy = agglo.classifier_probability(fc, rf)

    pr_test, ws_test = (map(imio.read_h5_stack,
                            ['test-p1.lzf.h5', 'test-ws.lzf.h5']))
    g_test = agglo.Rag(ws_test, pr_test, learned_policy, feature_manager=fc)

The best expected segmentation is obtained at a threshold of 0.5, when a
merge has even odds of being correct or incorrect, according to the
trained classifier.

.. code:: python

    g_test.agglomerate(0.5)

The RAG is a *model* for the segmentation. To extract the segmentation
itself, use the ``get_segmentation`` function. This is a map of labels
of the same shape as the original image.

.. code:: python

    seg_test1 = g_test.get_segmentation()

Gala transparently supports multi-channel probability maps. In the case
of EM images, for example, one channel may be the probability that a
given pixel is part of a cell boundary, while the next channel may be
the probability that it is part of a mitochondrion. The feature managers
work identically with single and multi-channel features.

.. code:: python

    # p4_train and p4_test have 4 channels
    p4_train = imio.read_h5_stack('train-p4.lzf.h5')
    # the existing feature manager works transparently with multiple channels!
    g_train4 = agglo.Rag(ws_train, p4_train, feature_manager=fc)
    (X4, y4, w4, merges4) = g_train4.learn_agglomerate(gt_train, fc)[0]
    y4 = y4[:, 0]
    rf4 = classify.default_random_forest().fit(X4, y4)
    learned_policy4 = agglo.classifier_probability(fc, rf4)
    p4_test = imio.read_h5_stack('test-p4.lzf.h5')
    g_test4 = agglo.Rag(ws_test, p4_test, learned_policy4, feature_manager=fc)
    g_test4.agglomerate(0.5)
    seg_test4 = g_test4.get_segmentation()

For comparison, gala allows the implementation of many agglomerative
algorithms, including mean agglomeration (below) and
`LASH <http://www.mit.edu/people/sturaga/papers/JainNIPS2011.pdf>`__.

.. code:: python

    g_testm = agglo.Rag(ws_test, pr_test,
                        merge_priority_function=agglo.boundary_mean)
    g_testm.agglomerate(0.5)
    seg_testm = g_testm.get_segmentation()

Evaluation
~~~~~~~~~~

The gala library contains numerous evaluation functions, including edit
distance, Rand index and adjusted Rand index, and our personal favorite,
the variation of information (VI):

.. code:: python

    gt_test = imio.read_h5_stack('test-gt.lzf.h5')
    import numpy as np
    results = np.vstack((
        ev.split_vi(ws_test, gt_test),
        ev.split_vi(seg_testm, gt_test),
        ev.split_vi(seg_test1, gt_test),
        ev.split_vi(seg_test4, gt_test)
        ))
    print(results)

This should print something like:

::

    [[ 0.1845286   1.64774412]
     [ 0.18719817  1.16091003]
     [ 0.38978567  0.28277887]
     [ 0.39504714  0.2341758 ]]

Each row is an evaluation, with the first number representing the
undersegmentation error or false merges, and the second representing the
oversegmentation error or false splits, both measured in bits.

(Results may vary since there is some randomness involved in training a
random forest, and the datasets are small.)

As mentioned earlier, many other evaluation functions are
available. See the documentation for the ``evaluate`` package for more
information.

.. code:: python

    # rand index and adjusted rand index
    ri = ev.rand_index(seg_test1, gt_test)
    ari = ev.adj_rand_index(seg_test1, gt_test)
    # Fowlkes-Mallows index
    fm = ev.fm_index(seg_test1, gt_test)

Other options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Gala supports a wide array of merge priority functions to explore your
data. We can specify the median boundary probability with the
``merge_priority_function`` argument to the RAG constructor:

.. code:: python

    g_testM = agglo.Rag(ws_test, pr_test,
                        merge_priority_function=agglo.boundary_median)

A user can specify their own merge priority function. A valid merge
priority function is a callable Python object that takes as input a
graph and two nodes, and returns a real number.

To be continued...
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

That's a quick summary of the capabilities of Gala. There are of course
many options under the hood, many of which are undocumented... Feel free
to push me to update the documentation of your favorite function!
